ADR resilience (#2320)
SAP/cloud-sdk-js: knowledge-base/adr/0031-resilience-options.md

# Resilience Options in the SAP Cloud SDK for JavaScript

## Status

proposed

## Context

### Overview on Request Types

> If a user uses the typed clients or the `executeHttpRequest()` method, the SDK creates a different requests.

Reviewer: There is a mistake in this sentence, but I also don't get the purpose of this sentence? Are the requests different?! Or do you mean multiple?

In order to discuss the different resilience options it is good to list these requests first.
The term `target system` is used for the system defined in the destination.

- XSUAA (BTP service) to fetch a service token

> - Destiantaion service (BTP service) to fetch the destination

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- destiantaion service (BTP service) to fetch the destination
```

> - CSRF token request to the target system for non read requests

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- CSRF token request to the target system for non-read requests
```

- actual request to the target system

> In the discussion we group the latter two requests to the target system with respect to resilience and the first two.

Reviewer: This sentence is incomplete, but I think I know what is meant. It would be easier to grasp this if you just omit this sentence and do this:

- BTP service requests:
  - ...
- Target system requests:
  - ...

### Status Quo

We have two interfaces considering resilience:

```ts
export interface ResilienceOptions {
  enableCircuitBreaker?: boolean;
  timeout?: number;
}

export interface HttpRequestConfigBase {
    ...
    timeout?: number | false | undefined
    ...
}
```

> - The `ResilienceOptions` are applied to the BTP service calls. They contain a circuitBreaker and timeout.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The `ResilienceOptions` are applied to the BTP service calls. They contain a circuit breaker and timeout.
```

- The timeout in the `HttpRequestConfigBase` is for all http calls to the target system and passed to axios.

The settings are passed in the following way:

```js
myApi.getAll().timeout(20).execute({ enableCircuitBreaker: true, timeout: 10 });
executeHttpRequest(
  { enableCircuitBreaker: true, timeout: 10 },
  { timeout: 20 }
);
```

So we have something for circuit breaker and timeout.

|     Option      | On target | On BTP | Default target | Default BTP |
| :-------------: | :-------: | :----: | :------------: | :---------: |
| circuit breaker |    ❌     |   ✅   |      n.a.      |  enabled   |
|     timeout     |    ✅     |   ✅   |    enabled     |   enabled   |
|      retry      |    ❌     |   ❌   |      n.a.      |    n.a.     |
|   rate limit    |    ❌     |   ❌   |      n.a.      |    n.a.     |
|   bulk limit    |    ❌     |   ❌   |      n.a.      |    n.a.     |

## Decision

### SDK vs. User

There are two standpoints:
- User needs to implement it
- SDK implements it

Arguments in the discussion

> - flexible middle ware approach implemented by the user more flexible

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- flexible middleware approach implemented by the user more flexible
```

- Step 3 (Optional): Make resilience globally configurable for all requests.
Do this on demand or after customer feedback.
- Default for circuit breaker is on.
- Default for retry is off since this seems a bigger behavior change

|     Option      | On target | On BTP | Default target | Default BTP | Remarks |
| :-------------: | :-------: | :----: | :------------: | :---------: | --- |
| circuit breaker |    ✅     |   ✅   |    enabled     |   enabled   | tenant aware |
|     timeout     |    ✅     |   ✅   |    enabled     |   enabled   |  |
|      retry      |    ✅     |   ✅   |    disabled    |   disabled  | no retry: circuit breaker open and 401,403 |
|   rate limit    |    ❌     |   ❌   |      n.a.      |    n.a.     | |
|   bulk limit    |    ❌     |   ❌   |      n.a.      |    n.a.     | |

### Variant A - Opinionated

- We pick an implementation and only provide options
- For retry, we would use [async retry](https://www.npmjs.com/package/async-retry)
- For circuit breaker we would use [opossum](https://www.npmjs.com/package/opossum)

This determines the options.
The API would look like:

```ts
myApi
  .getAll()   
  .timeout(20) //deprecate 

>   .resiliencec({

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  .resilience({
```

      timeout: 10,
      circuitBreaker: true,   // CircuitBreakerOptions | undefined | true
      retry: true             // RetryOptions | undefined | true
  })
  .execute({ 

>       enableCircuitBreaker: true, timeout: 10, //deprecate

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      enableCircuitBreaker: true,
      timeout: 10, //deprecate
```

      destinationName: 'my-dest'
  });

> executeHttpRequest({

Reviewer: ```suggestion

executeHttpRequest({
```

Reviewer 2: There is an empty line above the function call 😉

>     enableCircuitBreaker: true, timeout: 10, //deprecate

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    enableCircuitBreaker: true,
    timeout: 10, //deprecate
```

      retry: true             // RetryOptions | undefined | true
  })
  .execute({ 
      enableCircuitBreaker: true,
      timeout: 10, //deprecate
      destinationName: 'my-dest'
  });

executeHttpRequest({
    enableCircuitBreaker: true,
    timeout: 10, //deprecate
    destinationName: 'my-dest'
  },
  {
   resilience: {
     timeout: 10,
     circuitBreaker: true,  // CircuitBreakerOptions | undefined | true
     retry: true            // RetryOptions | undefined | true
   }
  }
);
```

Pro:
- Easy to use
- Defaults non-breaking not an issue
- TypeScript shows options

Contra:
- No custom implementation
- We have to make assumption on reasonable behavior

### Variant B - Middleware (Default off)

- Users can pass a function taking a `Promise<T>` and returning a `Promise<T>`. 
This function will be executed around the http calls (BTP and target) system
- We provide a sample implementation `resilience()` for easy consumption
- Assumes all resilience is switched of per default

```ts
myApi
  .getAll()   
  .middleware(resilience()) //use all default value
  .execute({ 
      destinationName: 'my-dest'
  });

> myApi

Reviewer: ```suggestion

myApi
```

  .getAll()   
  .middleware(resilience({
      timeout: 123,
      circuitBreaker: true,  // CircuitBreakerOptions | undefined | true
      retry: true            // RetryOptions | undefined | true
  }))
  .execute({ 
      destinationName: 'my-dest'
  });

Parameters<middleware> = [async <T>(fn: Promise<T>, context?: any) => Promise<T>]

```

Pro:
- Easy to use
- Flexible 

Contra:
- TypeScript shows options
- We have to make assumption on reasonable behavior
- All resilience off is a behavioral change which could be seen as breaking

### Variant C - Middleware (Named)

- Similar to variant B
- Assumes that  some resilience is switched on per default and our approach needs to extend this
- A `id` is passed to the `middleware` method. Discussion basis - could also be some name and priority object. 
- For our resilience we use a `idDefault=10`.
- If 10 is used it will replace, if id < 10 is used the method is called before our default and id > 10 means after

```ts
myApi
  .getAll()   
  .middleware(resilience({
      timeout: 123,
      circuitBreaker: true,  // CircuitBreakerOptions | undefined | true
      retry: true            // RetryOptions | undefined | true

>   }),id)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  }), id)
```

  .execute({ 
      destinationName: 'my-dest'
  });

Parameters<middleware> = [async <T>(fn: Promise<T>, context?: any) => Promise<T>,number]
```

### Global Switch

Up to know we discussed configuration on a per-request basis.
In practice, it could be desirable to enable resilience globally for all requests.

- Request config overrules global one
- Some global state holds the given option
- Implementation check is global config is present and uses them in the request

```ts
//Variant A
globalResilience(options: {
    timeout: number,
    circuitBreaker: CircuitBreakerOptions | undefined | true,
    retry: RetryOptions | undefined | true 
})

//Variant B 
globalResilience(middleWare : <T>(fn: Promise<T>, context?: any) => Promise<T>)

//Variant C
globalResilience(middleWare : <T>(fn: Promise<T>, context?: any) => Promise<T>,id:number)
)

```

### Options

The `RetryOptions` and `CircuitBreakerOptions` could be used to overwrite the default values.

> If you pass `true`,this will enable the resilience option with the default values.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you pass `true` this will enable the resilience option with the default values.
```

# Resilience Options in the SAP Cloud SDK for JavaScript

## Status

accepted

## Context

### Overview on Request Types

If a user uses the typed clients or the `executeHttpRequest()` method, the SDK creates various requests.

> In order to discuss the different resilience options it is good to list these requests first.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In order to discuss the different resilience options, it is good to list these requests first.
```

The term `target system` is used for the system defined in the destination.

- BTP service requests:
  - XSUAA (BTP service) to fetch a service token

>   - destination service (BTP service) to fetch the destination

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  - Destination service (BTP service) to fetch the destination
```

- Target system requests:
  - CSRF token request to the target system for non-read requests

>   - actual request to the target system

Reviewer 2: Is this the same for OData and OpenAPI?

  timeout?: number | false | undefined;
}
```

- The `ResilienceOptions` are applied to the BTP service calls. They contain a circuit breaker and timeout.
- The timeout in the `HttpRequestConfigBase` is for all http calls to the target system and passed to axios.

The settings are passed in the following way:

```js
myApi.getAll().timeout(20).execute({ enableCircuitBreaker: true, timeout: 10 });
executeHttpRequest(
  { enableCircuitBreaker: true, timeout: 10 },
  { timeout: 20 }
);
```

So we have something for circuit breaker and timeout.

|     Option      | On target | On BTP | Default target | Default BTP |
| :-------------: | :-------: | :----: | :------------: | :---------: |
| circuit breaker |    ❌     |   ✅   |      n.a.      |   enabled   |
|     timeout     |    ✅     |   ✅   |    enabled     |   enabled   |
|      retry      |    ❌     |   ❌   |      n.a.      |    n.a.     |
|   rate limit    |    ❌     |   ❌   |      n.a.      |    n.a.     |
|   bulk limit    |    ❌     |   ❌   |      n.a.      |    n.a.     |

## Decision

- Rate limit and bulk limit we will not be done -> no user request.
- We will implement an [extendable middleware approach]('#variant-c').

> - Step 1: Circuit breaker is in resilience middleware and made tenant aware

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Step 1: Circuit breaker will be part of the resilience middleware and will be tenant aware
```

> - Step 2: Retry is in resilience middleware and excluded if circuit breaker is open.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Step 2: Retry will be part of the resilience middleware and disabled if circuit breaker is open.
```

- Step 3 (Optional): Make resilience globally configurable for all requests.
  Do this on demand or after customer feedback.

> - Default for circuit breaker is on.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- By default the circuit breaker is enabled.
```

> - Default for retry is off since this is a bigger behavior change

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- By default retry is disabled since this is a bigger change of the previous behavior 
```

|     Option      | On target | On BTP | Default target | Default BTP | Remarks                                    |
| :-------------: | :-------: | :----: | :------------: | :---------: | ------------------------------------------ |
| circuit breaker |    ✅     |   ✅   |    enabled     |   enabled   | tenant aware                               |
|     timeout     |    ✅     |   ✅   |    enabled     |   enabled   |                                            |
|      retry      |    ✅     |   ✅   |    disabled    |  disabled   | no retry: circuit breaker open and 401,403 |
|   rate limit    |    ❌     |   ❌   |      n.a.      |    n.a.     |                                            |
|   bulk limit    |    ❌     |   ❌   |      n.a.      |    n.a.     |                                            |

## Consequences

The user has the option to switch-on and adjust resilience.

> If options are not sufficient a custom implementation can be used.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If options are not sufficient, custom implementations can be used.
```

Reviewer 2: If we use the "enabled by default", we will probably make the resilience middleware a dependency and therefore always include the third party libs even if they are not needed.

Alternatively they could be a peerDependency and replaced with something else (allowing for alterntaive libs or no libs). This is probably too complex though.

Author: The opsuum is already in and async-retry less than 100kb install size so we thought it is ok to include it even if not used.

## Implementation Details

### Options

> - For retry, we will use [async retry](https://www.npmjs.com/package/async-retry)
> - For circuit breaker we will use [opossum](https://www.npmjs.com/package/opossum)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Defaults:
- For retry, we will use [async retry](https://www.npmjs.com/package/async-retry)
- For circuit breaker, we will use [opossum](https://www.npmjs.com/package/opossum)
```

This determines the possible options you can set.
The `RetryOptions` and `CircuitBreakerOptions` could be used to overwrite the default values.

> If you pass `true`,this will enable the resilience option with the default values.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If you pass `true`, this will enable the resilience option with the default values.
```

If you pass `false`, this will disable the resilience option.

```ts
type RetryOptions = undefined | true | false | AsynRetryLibOptions;
type CircuitBreakerOptions = undefined | true | false | OpssumLibOption;
type TimeoutOptions = undefined | number | { service: number; target: number };

interface OpssumLibOption {

>   timeout?: number | false | undefined; //default 10000
>   errorThresholdPercentage?: number | undefined; //default 50
>   volumeThreshold?: number | undefined; // default 10
>   resetTimeout?: number | undefined; //default 30000
>   isolationStragtegy?: IsolationStrategy; //default tenant
> }
> 
> interface AsynRetryLibOptions {
>   retries?: number; //default 10

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  timeout?: number | false | undefined; // default 10000
  errorThresholdPercentage?: number | undefined; // default 50
  volumeThreshold?: number | undefined; // default 10
  resetTimeout?: number | undefined; // default 30000
  isolationStragtegy?: IsolationStrategy; // default tenant
}

interface AsynRetryLibOptions {
  retries?: number; // default 10
```

>   factor?: number; // default  2.
>   minTimeout?: number; // default 1000 ms.
>   maxTimeout?: number; // default Infinity.
>   randomize?: boolean; // default true.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  factor?: number; // default 2
  minTimeoutInMs?: number; // default 1000 ms
  maxTimeoutInMs?: number; // default Infinity
  randomize?: boolean; // default true
```

Reviewer 2: Maybe we could use https://github.com/vercel/ms for timeout times (it makes it clear and easy which time unit is used instead of always guessing if it is seconds / milliseconds / ...)

Author: I like the lib, but what will happen for JS users?

Reviewer 2: The lib uses strings like '2min' or '10ms'. So it is the same no matter if you use TS or JS.

Author: sure, I had more in mind, that the user does not get a design time failure if he/she passes `1000` instead of `'1sec'` string.

Author: I think the `ms(value)` should throw a reasonable error if I understood it right.

  onRetry: (e: Error) => {}; // default undefined
}

> //in the resiliece call:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
// in the resilience call:
```

> type ResilieceOptions = {

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
type ResilienceOptions = {
```

  timeout: undefined | number;
  retry: RetryOptions | { service: RetryOptions; target: RetryOptions };
  circuitBreaker:
    | CircuitBreakerOptions
    | { service: CircuitBreakerOptions; target: CircuitBreakerOptions };
};
```

The term `service` indicates the calls to the SAP BTP services and the `target` to the requests to the system in the destination.
The default situation with 10sec timeout, circuit breaker on and retry switched off would be:

```ts

> defaultResilieceOptions = {

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
defaultResilienceOptions = {
```

  timeout: 10000,
  retry: false,
  circuitBreaker: true
};
```

### Variant A - Opinionated

We pick an implementation and only provide options.
The API would look like:

```ts
myApi
  .getAll()

>   .timeout(20) //deprecate
>   .resilience({...}) //ResilieceOptions
>   .execute({
>       enableCircuitBreaker: true, //deprecate
>       timeout: 10, //deprecate
>       destinationName: 'my-dest'

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  .timeout(20) // deprecate
  .resilience({...}) // ResilieceOptions
  .execute({
      enableCircuitBreaker: true, // deprecate
      timeout: 10, // deprecate
      destinationName: 'my-dest'
```

  });
executeHttpRequest({
      destinationName: 'my-dest'
    },
    {

>       resilience: {...} //ResilieceOptions

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
      resilience: {...} // ResilieceOptions
```

- This property identifies the middleware as resilience and replace the default with the one with options.
- The options are extended - the example below would add retry and set a different timeout

```ts
resilience({
  timeout: 123,
  retry: { retries: 3 }
});
```

Use Case B:

- User wants to switch off resilience.
- User passes the relevant options:

```ts
resilience({
  retry: false,
  circuitBreaker: false
});
```

Use Case C:

- User needs to replace the resilience implementation because options are not enough
- A custom method is passed
- `sdkResilience` is passed as id in the `.middleware()` method
- The implementation of the SDK is omitted and the provided one is used instead

```ts
myApi.getAll().middleware(myCustomRelisience, 'sdkResilience').execute({
  destinationName: 'my-dest'
});
```

- This approach can also be used to switch off resilience by providing the identity function.

Use Case D:

- User wants to add non resilience middleware or extend the existing one with additional steps
- `id` is omitted and SDK sets some value
- Methods with custom implementation are passed and executed in order

```ts
myApi
  .getAll()

>   .middleware(resilience({ retry: true })) //switch on retry using default implementation

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  .middleware(resilience({ retry: true })) // switch on retry using default implementation
```

- We provide a sample implementation `resilience()` for easy consumption
- Assumes all resilience is switched off per default

```ts
myApi
  .getAll()
  .middleware(resilience({ retry: 3 }))
  .execute({ destinationName: 'my-dest' });

type Middleware<T> = <T>(
  fn: () => Promise<T>,
  context?: 'service' | 'target'
) => Promise<T>;
```

Pro:

- Easy to use
- Flexible
- TypeScript shows options

Contra:

- Extension of existing resilience not possible

### Variant C - Middleware (Named)<a name="variant-c" />

- Similar to variant B
- Assumes that some resilience is switched on per default and our approach considers this.
- An optional `id` is passed to the `middleware` method.
- The `id` will give us the flexibility to add and manage additional middlewares in the future.

```ts
myApi
  .getAll()
  .middleware(resilience({ circuitBreaker: false }), id)
  .execute({ destinationName: 'my-dest' });

type Middleware<T> = <T>(
  fn: () => Promise<T>,
  context?: 'service' | 'target'
) => Promise<T>;
```

Use Case A :

- User wants to adjust options of resilience.
- `id` is omitted and options are passed to middleware call.

> - The default resilience middleware function contains a `id` property with content `sdkResilience`.

Reviewer 3: Maybe rename the id with `defaultResilience` or `sdkDefaultResilience` to indicate that it is set by default. (Or if we have some more default middlewares, would it be nice to have a table of default `id`s?) 😄

Author: there are two separate arguments the resilience function and the id argument. We could use the function name or add a extra property to the function object.

Reviewer 2: I think function name feels pretty hacky... I would advise against that.

Author: yes, I would also use the extra property as indicated in the docs. My last sentence was more a explanation point that the function will hold the information

- User wants to switch off resilience.
- User passes the relevant options:

```ts
resilience({
  retry: false,
  circuitBreaker: false
});
```

Use Case C:

- User needs to replace the resilience implementation because options are not enough
- A custom method is passed
- `sdkResilience` is passed as id in the `.middleware()` method
- The implementation of the SDK is omitted and the provided one is used instead

```ts
myApi.getAll().middleware(myCustomRelisience, 'sdkResilience').execute({
  destinationName: 'my-dest'
});
```

- This approach can also be used to switch off resilience by providing the identity function.

Use Case D:

- User wants to add non resilience middleware or extend the existing one with additional steps
- `id` is omitted and SDK sets some value
- Methods with custom implementation are passed and executed in order

```ts
myApi
  .getAll()
  .middleware(resilience({ retry: true })) // switch on retry using default implementation
  .middleware(customHanlder1)
  .middleware(customHanlder2)
  .execute({
    destinationName: 'my-dest'
  });
```

Pro:

- Flexible
- Let the user include also other middleware

Contra:

- Most implementation effort

### Global Switch

> Up to know we discussed configuration on a per-request basis.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Up to now, we discussed the configuration on a per-request basis.
```
